Grade 11 Science – Unit 01
Unit: Biology
Topic: Living Tissues – Worksheet Content

Definition of Tissue:
A tissue is a group of cells with a common origin that are adapted to perform a specific function in the body.

Classification of Plant Tissues:
Plant tissues are classified into two groups according to the ability of cell division. These are meristematic tissues and permanent tissues.

Meristematic Tissue:
Meristematic tissue consists of actively dividing cells. These cells are small, living, have a prominent nucleus, lack large vacuoles and intercellular spaces, and are responsible for plant growth.

Types of Meristematic Tissues:
Meristematic tissues are classified as apical meristems, intercalary meristems and lateral meristems based on their location and function.

Permanent Tissue:
Permanent tissue is a tissue that has lost the ability to divide and is specialized to perform a particular function.

Classification of Permanent Tissues:
Permanent tissues are classified into simple permanent tissues and complex permanent tissues based on the type of cells present.

Simple Permanent Tissues:
Simple permanent tissues consist of only one type of cell. They are parenchyma, collenchyma and sclerenchyma.

Basis of Classification of Simple Permanent Tissues:
Simple permanent tissues are classified based on the shape of cells and the nature of the cell wall.

Complex Permanent Tissues:
Complex permanent tissues consist of different types of cells working together to perform a common function.

Types of Complex Permanent Tissues:
The two types of complex permanent tissues are xylem and phloem.

Xylem Tissue:
Xylem tissue is composed of vessel elements, tracheids, fibres and parenchyma. It transports water and minerals and provides mechanical support.

Phloem Tissue:
Phloem tissue is composed of sieve tube elements, companion cells, fibres and parenchyma. It transports food synthesized in leaves to other parts of the plant.

Animal Tissues:
Animal tissues are classified into four main types. These are epithelial tissue, connective tissue, muscle tissue and nervous tissue.

Epithelial Tissue:
Epithelial tissue consists of tightly packed cells placed on a basement membrane. It lines free surfaces of the body and performs protection, absorption, secretion and filtration.

Connective Tissue:
Connective tissue consists of cells and fibres embedded in a matrix. It connects organs and tissues and provides support.

Muscle Tissue:
Muscle tissue is composed of muscle fibres capable of contraction and relaxation. It is responsible for movement.

Types of Muscle Tissue:
Muscle tissue is classified into smooth muscle tissue, skeletal muscle tissue and cardiac muscle tissue.

Nervous Tissue:
Nervous tissue consists of neurons specialized for the transmission of impulses.

Types of Neurons:
Neurons are classified as sensory neurons, motor neurons and interneurons based on their function.
